Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Dr Mauro Silva Junior. He is professor
in the Department of Basic Psychological Processes at the
Psychology Institute at the University of Brasilia in Brazil.
He works on interpersonal relationships, especially the traits of
individuals and their social partners such as sex differences,
differences between parents and friends and the use of
technology as a mediator of social interactions. And today,
we're focusing mostly on interpersonal relationships from an evolutionary
perspective, things like personality, sexual orientation. So, socio sexuality
and the role some of those factors play in
interpersonal relationships, namely in those particular cases, romantic relationships
and also a little bit on mating systems in
human societies also from an evolutionary perspective. So, uh
Maru, welcome to the show, it's a big pleasure
to everyone.
It's my pleasure, Ricardo, thanks for the invitation.
So uh to start with interpersonal relationships, there are,
of course, in humans, there's different kinds of interpersonal
relationships, like for example, relationships between parents and their
offspring, uh uh friendships, romantic relationships. So uh let's
start perhaps with the general intro action here and
then we, we might tackle each specific kind of
interpersonal relationship in turn here. So what aspects of
human cognition and motivation would you say play the
biggest role in interpersonal relationships from an evolutionary perspective?
Um OK. Yes, I would say that there are
a lot of uh different aspects of our cognition,
motivation that play a role in our interpersonal relationships.
I think you and your public may be familiar
with the cheated detection system and the keen detection
system, they comprise what we call cognition. Uh But
from an evolutionary perspective, I think it doesn't make
much sense to the to separate cognition and motivation.
Uh For example, if, if one individual uh learn
cues to detect cues, to learn who their king
are, this individual is also more likely to trade
off his or her own welfare to provide benefits
to their king. So this is also motivation, right?
Uh I see that most of the time the
cognition, motivation work together to regulate behavior. So I
think this is the the right way to approach
this. And I think this difference is more didactic,
it makes sense in this Didac sense, but uh
usually they work together. Uh But from the motivational
aspect, I would say that um that is the
search and maintaining for romantic and sexual uh relationships
and also to develop friendships. Uh It's interesting um
the fact uh of studying the interpersonal relationships from
the evolutionary perspective is that uh it challenges an
old idea that uh studying the evolution of our
behavior. It kind of lead us to an understand
of an individualistic perspective, the of humans. But this
is far from true as more as I study
the interpersonal relationships, more II I came to the
conclusion that from the the cognition perspective or the
motivational perspective, how social we are, how dependent of
all those we are. And this is can be
uh very um it's very clear in, in, in,
in studies from uh the evolutionary perspective. Uh I
think for example, the the revised uh parameter of
needs from an evolutionary perspective as a powerful framework
to understand how our motivational systems are related to
sociality. And that's why I, I do it with
a great pleasure.
Mhm And so let's get specifically now into relationships
with parents. So what aspects again of our human
psychology play the biggest role here? I mean, what
aspects of our human psychology do you think are
more important for people to have a good understanding
of, to understand how relationships with parents work from
an evolutionary perspective?
Uh Well, I would say there are a lot
of them, but for example, um I, I would
say that paternity, uncertainty play an important role. Uh
I have data from this on my uh phd
dissertation. Uh WHEN I studied the interpersonal relationships, not
only with parents but with the relatives in general.
Um I used the social networks questionnaire that was
developed by Robin do and apply this questionnaire in
Brazil. So in this questionnaire, we uh requested very
specific information about each uh of individuals, relatives, like
uh they have to describe the initials of their
names, uh their age, their sex, if they were
maternal or paternal, if they were genetic or adoptive
relatives, the emotional closes that, that people uh felt
towards them and uh how far they lived from
each other. Uh One interesting result about this study
was our discovery that people describe it more maternal
relatives than maternal relatives. And, and it's interesting because
we collected data in Brazil uh in England and
in Belgium. But it, it's very unlikely right, that
people in three different countries have more maternal relatives
than maternal relatives. Uh But there is a, there
is an uh uh an answer for that. Um
For example, we we ask people to use their
mobile agenda to fulfill the questionnaires. And if, if
they have used the mobile agenda, they could not
forget anyone but uh in, in fulfilling the questionnaires,
we also would see an alphabetic order. For example,
the first people to be described, it would be
for example, Alice and then Brandon and, and in,
in the late sections, it would be Gad but
Mauru before he can, but we don't see an
alphabet code in the in any of these questionnaires.
Uh What people did. Uh THEY, they, they, they
have a logic on describing those relationships but they
didn't use the the mobile agenda actually. Uh WHEN
you see the first rank position, the first line
of the questionnaire. Uh IT'S in most of cases,
most more than 76% of the time, I think
it was their mothers. Usually the mothers is the
first line. The first person they describe the first
rank position. The questionnaire, the second rank position is
uh in most of cases their fathers in and
in the first, in the third ranked position, their
siblings. And from this point on, they start to
describe all the kinds of relatives from the maternal
side of the family and the paternal side of
the family uh in this parent is, is found
in all three countries. Uh BUT the way they
decided to describe their relationships is uh give us
a clue why they have, they describe it more
maternal than maternal relatives. It's because there is uh
an association between the rank position and and the
emotional closes, they feel towards each of those, those
people, for example, their mother, that was usually the
first person they described, they have, they have they
had the the highest emotional close in this level.
And when you go to the second, the 3rd
and 4th ranked positions, there is a decrease of
the emotional close in this level. So uh I
don't believe the participants were aware they were doing
this, but there is a logic on, on doing
this once they didn't, they didn't uh use the
the mobile agenda, they had to uh use a
different logic and they use the emotional closeness level.
So we we actually found a negative correlation between
rank position and emotional closeness level. The the highest
of the emotional close closes, uh closes level is
associated with the lower rank positions. And even more
interesting than that is the fact that with the
Matano uh relatives in all three countries, people had
the highest emotional closeness level when compared to the
maternal ones. Um And I think this is interesting
because for example, we have three countries, two in
Europe and one in South America. Uh WE can
say the, the three of them are, they belong
to the Western, the western cultures. But uh we,
we cannot say that we can't say they are
the same, there are similarities among them, but there
are also a cultural differences among them, even if
we consider the England and Belgium, uh this kind
of relationship that is more uh proximate with maternal
relatives seems to be the case of Western cultures,
for example, uh in traditional societies where there is
a norm uh of uh patri local norm uh
where women, when they get married, they leave their
campsite and uh and go to to live with
the husband's family, uh their families uh make make
guarantees that they, they're getting married virgins. So when
they, when they get married, they are not only
controlled by the vigilance of their own husbands. But
also with the husband's family. And in these societies,
if you ask Children, uh from which grandparents or
uncles and aunts, which of them, the maternal side
of the paternal side, they like more. They would
say the paternal side, they would choose their paternal
grandparents, the paternal uncles, the paternal ones because it's
among them that they are raised and they develop
more uh intimate relationships with them. But in the
absence of a norm like this, people actually become
more um close to the maternal side of the
family. And we understand this uh through the lens
of the paternal uncertainty. So the paternity, uncertainty in
traditional societies make makes easier for Children to develop
strong relationship with the paternal side of the family.
But in the absence of this uh in this
cultural norm, people develop more uh uh close relationships
with the maternal side of the family because uh
for instance, uh there is AAA 100% of certainty
that the the maternal side of the family belongs
to the same family.
Mhm No, that, that's very interesting. Actually, before you
got to the last part of your answer, I
was really going to ask you about paternity, uncertainty
and if it really played a role there, but
you already answered that part. And so I guess
that in that particular case with the study you
did there particularly, we could say that there are
cultural factors playing a role here but also uh
aspects of our evolved psychology, psychology, like in that
specific case, paternity, uncertainty that might also play a
role, at least in the absence of those cultural
factors you pointed to like for example, uh patri
locality. Correct.
Yes. Yes, yes, yes. And, and I think that,
that that must be the case because for example,
if we, if we go back to the four
questions of pathology, our behavior is better understood if
we know all the uh ultimate imp proximate uh
explanations of behavior. And I think in this case,
we have an ultimate uh causation which is pater
paternity, uncertainty and approximate causation, which is this patri
local law. Uh
There you are referring to a tin burger t
burgers for questions, right.
Yes. Yes, exactly. Yeah.
So what about friendships then? So that, that's about
uh what we talked here was about relationships between
parents and their offspring. And now what about friendships?
What aspects of our evolved psychology play a role
there?
Mhm. Uh I, I also can say there are
many factors involved but one of one of those
factors that uh I think is one of the
most important ones is homophily, homophily is the, the
level the degree of similarity between two people. Uh
For example, if they share the same age, the
same sex or gender, uh if they have a
similar interests for sports, for music, if they, they
share a similar traits of personality and homophobic is
the degree of uh similarity between them. There is
also a dream for homophily for couples, which is
homo homo Gamey describes exactly the same thing. And
we can understand Homo as a sort of mating
that the level of similarity between, between couples. But
uh coming back from France, uh I think that
homophily is very powerful uh to understand this because
it really shapes how we uh interact with uh
other people. And I, I would, I would try
to, to illustrate this case. Uh GIVE an example
of a game in Brazil. I don't know if
you have a similar game in Portugal or in
the countries of your audience. But there is a
game is a, is a uh a chair game
where for example, we have five chairs but only
four players,
we have the, we have the same game here.
Yeah. OK. OK. So that's interesting. Uh And the,
and the music is playing and the, and, and
these four players are running around the chairs and
when the music stops, uh those players have to
find a seat for themselves, but once there is
only four chairs, um uh so one of one
of the players will be left out. Uh And
then the, the, the, the game starts another round.
And I, I think from, from a, from a
developmental perspective, this is what happens uh in our,
in our relationships with friends. There are some people
that have a seat for example, uh for some
time, but they might leave eventually for some reason.
Uh Do I, I have data about this also
in, from my phd dissertation and I came to
the conclusion he can, that we kind of have
uh we kind of manage our interpersonal relationships. And
WW what do exactly mean when I say manage,
uh I really need manage because there are more
people in the world that we are able to
form and maintain our relationship. That's the premise of
the dumbest number theory, right that you uh are
familiar with. So uh that is maybe that is
the limitation, a cognitive limitation to manage those relationships.
And we have to choose to pick, to pick
people from the ground and use the degree of
similarity between us and them to develop these friendships.
For example, if two people that don't know each
other uh uh in the in the first contact,
they, they came to know that they have studied
in the same school, for example, or in the
same university, this information alone. Uh WE work as
uh increasing the, the, the, the likelihood of uh
a positive uh interaction. So they will feel more
close to each other because they shared something. So
that's why I think that we, we do not
have, we, we do have an active role in
our uh uh relationships. Even even if we're not
aware of this, we of course, are not aware
they were choosing people because of the sex, because
of the gender. But we like more people who
are similar to us. Even more recent studies about
politics, for example, show that we have more uh
interest with people who, with whom we share more
similarities with, with whom we share more of our
political view and, and, and et cetera. So I
think homophile is a good candidate or to understand
how um our friendship is uh is uh can
be uh understood uh from this uh psychological perspective.
Mhm. And I mean, from an evolutionary perspective, would
the rationale behind homophily be something like, uh we
tend to prefer to establish relationships with people that
are similar to us in our interests, goals and
so on because uh they would help us achieve
those same goals and uh interests. Is that it?
Yes. Yes, I believe, I believe, yes. Because for
example, if people share the same interests, they might
have the same agenda if, if you have uh
a coalition of psychological perspective of, of this relationship,
if they, if people share the same interests, they
might share uh the same agenda. Uh And when
I say agenda, I mean, this is general, not
only uh political ones but they, they, that could
be facil that could facilitate cooper operation for certain.
Mhm. So let's get now into romantic partners then.
And I guess that the rest of the interview
will focus a lot on romantic relationships in different
ways. So we've already tackled apparent offspring relations and
friendships. What factors from an evolutionary perspective play the
biggest role or some of the biggest factors here
in romantic relationships or relationships between romantic partners.
Mhm. Um, I, I tend to focus on relationship
satisfaction when I'm studying romantic relationships. Uh, BECAUSE from,
uh, an evolutionary psychological perspective, relationship satisfaction is the
subjective feeling that awaits the costs and benefits of
the, of our relationships. So if the benefits outweigh
the costs, people would feel more satisfied with their
relationships, for example. And there are a lot of
uh all the variables that might influence people's uh
relationship satisfaction. The 11 of those that I chose
to understand this was the a adult attachment theory.
Um And, and why is that many studies show
there is a positive correlation between uh a secure
attachment and relationship satisfaction. But uh on the other
hand, there is, there are also some studies that
show there is no association between them or some,
some studies that show that is uh a negative
association between them that is uh uh an expected
um uh correlation between security and uh relationship satisfaction.
So in, in a recent paper published last year,
uh my students and I sought to investigate using
a systematic review uh to understand this question if
there is indeed the the relationship between security, secure
attachment and satisfaction is positive. And we also try
to taking into account the cultural differences that might
exist because uh the attachment theory was developed as
most of the psychological theories was developed in western
cultures. So it's interesting for not only interesting, but
it's important for an evolutionary perspective, take into account
uh a cross cultural uh view. Uh So we,
at the end, I think we had 33 studies
from many parts of the world and the majority
of them, like 80% of them uh confirmed this
uh uh association. There is a positive association between
secure attachment and relationship satisfaction or uh a negative
association between insecure attachment and relationship satisfaction. Uh And
this is also true for both Western countries and
non western countries like Malaysia like Iran for example.
And uh but but there are some uh important
uh differences among those, those countries too. For example,
we we also found that uh uh studies that
found no association between the two constructs. And uh
there are studies that also found that there is
a negative association between secure attachment and uh relationship
satisfaction. And the majority of these results who do
not conform the general rule, they belong to non
western countries. To be, to be honest, I don't
have an explanation for this. Uh What we know
is that in different countries, uh the predominant uh
attachment style might differ in some cases is the
secure attachment. You know, the cases is the the
avoidance uh attachment or the youngsters avoid. So they
the, the, the, the, the predominant style might of
course interfere in this relationship. Uh, BUT in general,
yes, I would say that, uh, the, the answer
is that most of studies involve Western and Northwestern
countries showed a positive association between security and satisfaction.
Mhm.
And of course, there's also other factors that could
play a role here and one of them is
personality or personality traits. So, what is the role
played by personality in interpersonal uh relationships in general?
Now, now I'm talking about interpersonal relationships in general,
not just romantic relationships.
Uh OK. Uh Well, I would say that if
we take, for example, the big frame work, we
can understand that uh we can see that uh
those personality traits influence our behavior in general. For
example, there are uh evidence that people who have
a certain type of relationship of, of personality. They,
they tend to be more uh extrovert or more
introvert, for example. Um I'm, I'm actually uh more
interested in the doctor tried personality traits, for example,
uh in most of the, in most of the,
in the literature, uh there is evidence that this
uh personality traits like Machiavellian is like psychopathy and
narcissism. They play a role in social relationships because
these three traits share a common and social psychology
that uh in a, in a way that individuals
act in a certain way to uh provide benefits
for themselves at the expansion of uh of other
people. And there are a lot of studies showing
that, for example, that people are more people with
higher levels of doctor traits. They, they tend to
lie more, they tend to cheat or cheat, to
cheat on exams. More, they cheat on their partners
more frequently than people who have, uh, uh, lower
levels of drug trade personality traits.
Mhm. A and by the way, how do you
approach personality from an evolutionary perspective? I'm asking you
that because uh at least as far as I
understand it. And through the conversations I had on
the show with many evolutionary psychologists at this point,
uh they are mostly interested or, or you are
mostly interested in understanding the aspects of our evolved
psychology that are uh the theoretically, at least universal.
There is the, the common uh information processing mechanisms,
the the ones that are common across all societies,
all humans. But then there are personality traits that
uh I mean, play a role in explaining uh
individual differences. I mean, they are one aspect of
our individual differences. So how do you approach personality
from an evolutionary perspective?
Uh OK. I I also tend to agree with
this. Uh But I think we will find uh
this universal aspect of personality as many other uh
psychological aspects such as emotion, cognition, motivation uh in
the, in the relationship between the demands of the
environment such as uh an adaptive problem and the,
the supposed psychological process that is involved with the
solution of this uh adaptive problem. And maybe that's
why we can find this association between uh dark
tribe traits and a social behavior because in some
case, it's adaptive for people to benefit themselves even
if it's expensive of other people. Um But II,
I will, I cannot say, for example, that it's
not the same to say that all people will,
will present the same personality traits or they will
present the same level of these traits. And why
is that? Probably because they are exposed to different
uh envi environments. And in response to the challenge
of those vitamins, they developed a certain level of
personality traits. So they could be higher in psychopathy
and narcissism. But other people who are not exposed
to this kind of vitamins would uh develop uh
all kinds of uh personality traits. That is that
is an indication, for example, from life history theory
that the dark tried traits uh may may be
part of the f uh life history strategy. Um
I, I have, I have a uh a chapter
on this but I I think this, this association
between the dark tribe traits and the life, the
life history. The the first life history structure is
not as straightforward as has been a knowledge in
the literature. There are some shortcomings that provide some
uh doubts that we should not uh consider uh
the doctor tried personality uh so easily as part
of the first of life history. Mhm.
Yeah. I, in that particular case, I mean, if
that would be true, then according to life history
theory applied to humans in that. So if people
are exposed to an environment where there's, uh, more
resource stress, I mean, they, they have, uh, fewer
resources and stuff like that and fewer uh future
prospect, lower future prospects and stuff like that, then
they would tend to develop higher levels of the
dark tri personality traits because those would be adaptive
in that kind of environment. Is that it?
Yes, yes. But those studies also show that this
is true for some of the person from, from
the doctor traits, but it's not true for the
others. And in some cases, they go against into
the hypothesis. And for example, uh a student of
mine just presented her master's uh thesis and she
found that psychopathy was not in adolescence was not
related to the level of severity or unpredictability in
their environments. So I think yes, that is an
indication but it's not so strong. Mhm.
So let's talk a little bit now about the
evolution of sexual orientation. So how do you approach
it uh from an evolutionary perspective?
Uh Yeah, I think he got the, the it's
best to describe the devolution of same sex, sexual
uh behavior. Uh BECAUSE the concept of sexual orientation
is uh specific to humans and uh particularly from
Western cultures, uh the, you know, western cultures, they
don't, they they don't have this concept of sexual
orientation, for example, uh the fain is from Samoa,
which is a culture that has same sex, sexual
behavior. And I'm sorry, I, I will, I will
say only SSB to make it easier. Uh So
in, in the Samoa Islands that there is SSB
but the we we, we find that in the
pho pho fens are adult males who, who develop
a sexual attraction to all the adult males, but
they have uh another gender. So they, they, they
dress in a different way and this third gender
is recognized by the society. It's not the same
as being a woman. Uh The pines of Samoa,
they do know that they exist the gay men
in the West, but they say they are not
gay men. And when, when we, when it's asked
them why they say that gay men have sex
with other gay men while for a fe have
sex with heterosexual men. So we can see in
here a difference between what is a sexual orientation?
How it's, it is conceptualized in the West. And
uh a question about gender, how it is conceptual,
conceptualized in the, in the islands of Samoa. So
what what that is in common between them, the
same sex, sexual behavior or the same sex uh
uh sexual attraction. So I would say it's better
to describe the, the, the SSB for example. And
we can understand SSB also from a cross cultural
perspective and, and a comparative perspective uh in the,
in the evolution of SSB, for example, uh a
lot of different hypotheses have been tested and some
of them suggest that we might not have a
single explanation for SSB in different animal species. Uh
For instance, uh the inability to discriminate between males
and females might be the explanation why we find
SSB in fruit flies, for example. Uh On the
other hand, uh in species like dolphins, the better
explanation for SSB will be uh learning the appropriate
sexual behavior to present with an individual of a
different sex. But none of this hypothesis can be
applied to humans. And for the reason that I
uh I already mentioned it and that, that there
is more, more uh things in, in, in on
the table about tho those hypothesis. And I would
say, for example, that in the past uh uh
same sex sexual behavior was considered a Renan paradox.
And researchers tend to think that way because they
worked on the assumption that SSB would not benefit
uh the, the fitness of the individuals who present
this behavior. But from the recent decades, there are
more and more evidence showing quite the opposite that
the, the SSB actually increases uh if not directly
but indirectly the, the the fitness of the individuals
who present this behavior.
Mhm And so in that particular case, the hypothesis
that you're working with there is the one where,
for example, there would be an increase in fitness
for the individual himself because, uh, they would, uh,
participate perhaps in activities regarding, uh, the Children of
their other o of other members of their family.
Uh, AND, and that's the way by which they
would increase indirectly their fitness, right? Because the part,
at least a percentage of their genes would also
be in the bodies of, uh, uh, for example,
their brothers or sisters, Children. And so they would,
for example, help raise them. And that would be
a way of at least indirectly increasing their own
fitness. That's the hypothesis, the hypothesis you're going with
there, right.
Yes. This is the key selection prothesis to understand
uh evolution of same sex uh attraction. Yeah. Mhm.
Uh And uh do you know if this would
apply to both uh male and female uh people
with same sexual behavior or with same sex, behavioral
attraction and uh sexual behaviors or not?
Um There is uh some controversy in this area
also with humans. Uh For example, uh there are
also many hypo, many different hypotheses to understand uh
SSB in humans. Uh The most prominent ones uh
tend to be the, the sexually antagonistic selection hypothesis
and the king selection hypothesis. As uh you, you
mentioned it uh also we have the fraternal, both
all the hypothesis, which is more um approximate explanation.
So uh it seems that we don't have a
single answer for the SSB in, in women and
men it seems that there are many, there are
multiple pathways working on for the SSB in males
and uh and females, for example, the organizational uh
effects of androgens in, in, in the intro during
life. It seems to be AAA better explanation for
SSSB in, in human females. And uh on from
the other side, the in selection hypothesis and the
fraternal uh both all the hypothesis might be the
better explanation for SSB in, in adult human adult
males.
Mhm So when it comes to these more proximate
explanations or some of these potential explanations, because as
you, as you said, there, we're still not completely
sure about the correct explanation behind SSB uh this
could be something that is not, I mean, completely
the result of just uh evolution but, but perhaps
some contextual factors as well like in the case
of the birth or the effect, I mean, that's
not uh straightforwardly the result of evolution but also
in that particular case, the fact that uh one
male, I guess, I guess we're talking about males
exclusively. In that case, a male that comes uh
in b in terms of the birth father, after
the their or his brothers or sisters would tend
to have a higher probability of being homosexual.
Right? Yes. Yes. Yes. And I think that, that
we, as I, as I said before, that maybe
there are many mechanisms working on, on to understand
SSB and they might not be the same for,
for human males and females. And I I would
say also that uh that, that are really uh
interesting studies and some of them are really powerful.
Uh But um it, it's, it's something that is
also uh being developed at the moment because for
example, the king selection hypothesis provides uh evidence for
SSB in culture, in all Western culture, for example,
just like those of the Samoa Islands. But we
don't find uh support for the King selection hypothesis
in the Western cultures, probably because in those societies,
homosexuality and bisexuality are not fully accepted. And so
this makes uh may, may, may create uh a
family problems between those individuals who present the SS
the SSP and their family. So they do not
develop um intimate uh more, more stronger ties with
the family. Mhm
So let's get into the topic of socio sexuality
here. That is also something that you've studied. So
what is the first of all? Perhaps, I guess
you could explain a little bit what actually soc
socio sexuality is and then uh what role does
it play when it comes to romantic relationships?
Oh yes. Uh SOCIAL sexuality is defined as the
individual disposition uh towards uncommitted sex. And it's usually
measured using the social, social sexual orientation inventory provides
the soar which is comprised of uh three different
dimensions, the behavioral dimension, the attitudinal dimension and the
desired dimension. Uh IN, in most studies, uh social
sexuality tends to be higher uh which means that
people have more uh positive uh attitudes towards uncommitted
sex or they have more sexual partners in men
compared to, to, to women. So, yes, I, I
would say.
Mhm And what? Yeah. And what explains individual differences
in socio sexuality? I mean, you mentioned their differences
or general differences between men and women. But I,
I would imagine that even among men and among
women, we should find different uh levels of socio
sexuality across individuals.
Right. Yes, indeed, indeed. That's exactly what we find.
Social sexuality is a measure of uh individual differences.
And this uh exactly what we find, for example,
there is not only differences between men and women,
but also in sexual orientation uh for, for more
than a decade, for one decade or, or, or
more, we have an indication that gay men have
a higher social sexuality than uh uh straight men,
for example, and singles, single individuals also tend to
have a higher social sexuality than individuals who are
in a relationship. And that makes sense, right? Because
uh if they do not do not have a
relationship, they are on the searching mode for uh
uh a partner. But it's interesting that I uh
I, I have found this in different uh studies
that uh even men uh regardless of their sexual
orientation who are in a romantic relationship. Uh If
they, if they have a high social sexuality, they
actually have had more than one partner during the,
the last 12 months, uh the, the time in
which they were in, in this committed relationship. So
being in a relationship in some way decreases the
level of social sexuality because maybe these, these people
are more focused in one, in a single relationship,
but it doesn't mean that they not have uh
other relationships if they have a higher social sexuality.
Mhm And, and I mean, I, I guess that
there are other uh specific behaviors, for example, earlier
you mentioned uh an increased uh predisposition to infidelity,
cheating on their partners and so on. But I
guess there would be other specific behaviors associated with
uh socio sexuality. Like, for example, in, in your
work, I read about earlier onset of sexual debut,
reduced sexual disgust, risk taking behaviors. Right. So, could
you tell us a little bit more about that?
Yes, for sure. Um If, if we consider the
definition of social sexuality uh which is being wily
to have uncommitted sex, uh one might uh expect
that for, for any individual to have unit that
must be uh casual sex and otherwise people would
never do it. And some of those uh mechanisms,
some of those candidates are uh a lower sexual
disgust and uh a higher risk taking behavior. Uh
For example, uh if, if an individual is looking
for a casual sex and maybe it, it's not
always the case that people who have uncommitted sex
have sex with strangers but in some cases it
happens that there are some strangers. Uh So if,
if you don't, if you're not fully know this
person, uh you, you have to assume some risks
when you have such intimate contact with this person.
Right. Mhm. Uh For example, some studies uh found
that Tinder users, they have uh a not only
a higher social sexuality, but they also have a
lower level of sexual disgust and higher levels of
risk taking behaviors. I have unpublished data of this
uh here in Brazil and I found exactly the
same thing. Um Unfortunately, it's not published yet, but
uh we included in this, in this uh in
this research, sexual orientation and um hookups apps who
are more common uh among the LGBT QR community.
Um WHEN, when, when, when people use this hookups
apps, they are more interested in casual sex and
they very often have sex with strangers. So you,
you, you assume some risk when you're doing that
because you're going to find someone that you don't
know and you're receiving this person in your place
or you're going to, to this person place. And
actually, we don't know what, what's going to happen.
Uh What we found was that uh the, the
gay men who use hookups apps have higher social
sexuality than the, the heterosexual men that use the
same hookups apps. And they also have a higher
sexuality compared to those gay men who are not
users of this uh uh hookup apps. So there
is uh this interaction between the use of the
apps and the, the sexual uh the sexual orientation.
Mhm So, uh let me ask you, by the
way, since you mentioned hookup apps and Tinder specifically
there, let me ask you one question about that.
So, um you said that uh people who are
on these apps tend to have higher levels of
socio sexuality than the general population. Correct?
Yes.
Yes. And so
then they no users,
then the non users. So if that's the case,
then uh wouldn't there be perhaps some limitations when
it comes to, for example, when people try to
uh use uh Tinder data and the data from
other apps to, to extrapolate from that, from those
data to the general population, in terms of, for
example, behaviors by men and women. When it comes
to the kinds of uh s partners or sexual
partners they prefer. I mean, I, I'm, I'm asking
you because many times we tend to assume that
what w we would be, we would find happening
in T on Tinder and other hookup app apps
would uh correlate with behaviors that we find in
the general population. But maybe there are some limitations
there in terms of how much we can extrapolate
or
Yes, for sure. I would say that the, the
this methodology that compares users and the users is
more related to the fact that the users of
hookups apps are in some way in the search
mode of the uh to find, to find a
new uh new partners. Uh Of course, they, this,
this apps uh show to people many different people.
So they, they can get to know each other
only swiping right, or swiping left or sending a
message. So it's very easily and you can do
this seated on your, in your sofa, right. It,
it's, it's, it's, it's not so costly to do
that. It's very different when you are in a
social interaction regularly with other people. So you can
focus only one person at a time. But uh
yes, I, I do agree with you. We cannot
uh generalize what people do on this uh on
these apps. But, but they are also interesting to,
to compare the behavior of users and non users.
Mhm No, I, I mean, I agree. It's just
that I was uh asking or perhaps pointing to
the fact that maybe uh at least in certain
cases, we have to be a little bit more
careful when assuming that the way people or users
of these apps would behave, there would uh mirror
the way that people uh that are non users
or the general population would behave in a sort
of real life situation or context.
Right? Yes. Yes. In this case, I, I do
agree with you. We cannot make this generalization. Mhm
And do levels of socio sexuality correlate then with
different mating strategies in terms of people being more
short term or long term oriented, for example.
Oh yes. Oh yes. Uh We have to remember
that socials, social sexuality is indeed a measure of
a short term image orientation. Um It's, it's not
uh it's something that I really advise people when
I'm talking about. This is the fact that uh
people that who are higher on social sexuality, they
can also form long term relationships. It's not deterministic,
right? Uh And this is one of the, the
reasons why the, the soy especially or the conceptualization
of social sexuality has been criticized by not fully
capturing the, the all possibilities of m orientations in
humans, but instead, it's for causing only on the
short term M orientation. Uh And that makes sense
because when, when you use the soy R, we,
we are actually measuring how many partners people had
in the last 12 months or in how many
pa partners they had in their, in their whole
life. So if you have a higher level of
uh sexual partners on, on these measures, you are
uh more short term uh orientated than other people.
But indeed, there are some, there are some empirical
and theoretical shortcomings of all of these and, and,
and, and, and some authors have indicated these shortcomings
about the conceptualization of, of, of the social sexuality.
But uh despite this, these limitations and, and also
at the same time, in in accordance of uh
of this uh conceptualization uh people with higher social
sexuality, they, they actually tended to, to be, to
have more extra pair uh uh relationships. They, they,
for example, that there is a recent study that
shows that social sexuality is a powerful predictor of
voluntary singlehood both in men and women. And as
I, as I told you before, uh even if
they are in a relationship, they, they tend to
have higher uh number of partners than those who
have a restricted social sexuality. So I would say
that indeed, social sex, social sexuality is a measure
of a short term and mating orientation.
Mhm So a very interesting study that you did
was that you studied the socio sexuality during the
COVID-19 pandemic. What could you tell us about it?
Like uh for example, was there any correlation between
socio sexuality and the adoption of social distancing measures
to prevent the transmission of COVID? And I mean,
I would imagine that if that was the case,
it would probably have something to do with people
who score higher on socio sexuality also scoring higher
on risk taking behaviors,
right? Oh, yes, I, I believe yes. And thanks
for the for the question. Uh THAT, that was
an interesting stu study that I carried out with
two colleagues of mine during the worst phases of
the pandemic here uh here in Brazil. And just
to give you uh some background uh of this
study, we, we carried out this study during this
phase of the pandemic, at the, at that time,
we didn't have vaccines and as other countries in
the world, uh the pandemic was very poorly in
Brazil. So there were people who did not believe
that was a serious issue and they felt uh
comfortable uh for not wearing masks and uh getting
around with other people. Uh So the, the, the
theoretical question that motivated this study was to understand
if there was some kind of trade off uh
that people might be experiencing at the time. Uh
For example, in the beginning of the pandemic, uh
we didn't know for sure how much long it
would take to, to stay at home, right? Uh
It's relatively OK if you do this for a
month maybe. Uh But if the quarantine uh takes
longer, like two months, four months, six months or
maybe a year, it, it uh requires more effort
of people to doing that and actually staying in
the quarantine for a long period uh affects your
life in, in, in many ways in, in, in,
in, in general, like for example, you're not seeing
your family, but also you're not having contact with
romantic partners or sexual partners. If you have uh
if you are single, that might be even more
difficult because maybe you have uh this uh uh
uh those needs and you, you, you don't have
a partner uh with whom who we may share
this intimacy. So that was exactly in the point
we were interested if people would um prevent uh
the COVID infection or they would uh present this
risk behavior to satisfy those needs. Um We collected
data only with men with different sexual orientations, bisexuals,
gays and heterosexuals. And I think we had more
than a 500 individuals from all o all regions
of Brazil. Uh And what, what the new results
showed that a minority of those men were uh
fully following the, the guidance of staying at home,
only a minority of them. And a great proportion
of those men uh actually uh had some kind
of uh uncommitted sex with someone. They, they, they
were not in all cases, strangers, but in some
cases, those people were strangers and with a greater
concern uh with strangers, some of those men had
uh uh an unprotected sex. So they, they took
the risks, the risk of getting two different kinds
of infections, the COVID, the COVID, the, the Coronavirus
and the, the sexual
admitted
infection infections. Yes, thank you. Um And as you,
as you, as you, as you said, uh there
was uh a correlation between social sexuality and an
earlier onset of uh sexual debut. Uh And I
think, I think this study is important, not only
because uh it provided more information about individual differences
in social sexuality, but this, this study can inform
public policies because uh provides information that uh in
a situation like the pandemic that was really unusual
uh for, for all of us, people will not
behave in the same way even if they have
the same information. So if the governments, for example,
wants to inform people and uh encourage them to
behave in a certain way to avoid uh the
spread of the virus, they have to take into
account that not, not everyone will behave in a,
in a similar way because people are not similar,
they have their differences and not only about social
sexuality or risk taking behaviors, but in many others.
So as more we know about this uh about
the individual differences, more we are able to uh
maybe uh really, really be effective in public policies
such as those related to, to the pandemic.
So perhaps in that specific case, if we take
into account individual differences, we would have to tailor
the message to the people with different uh personality
traits or with other different or with other individual
differences like socio sexuality.
Right? Indeed. Yes. Yes.
Mhm And I guess just another comment before we
get into another topic, I guess that this, that
you did on socio sexuality during the COVID-19 pandemic
point. Uh BECAUSE when I was asking the question,
I mentioned that probably it was related to higher
levels of risk taking behavior. But in that particular
case, when you mentioned some of those individuals that
didn't follow uh that didn't follow the social distancing
measures uh having had sex. Uh AND protected sex
specifically. Perhaps it also relates to reduced sexual disgust
on their part.
Can you, can you, can you explain more about
this?
Yeah, I I mean, I I was saying that
if some of those individuals that you mentioned there
uh had unprotected uh sex with the partners they
have, then that in terms of these being to
socio sexuality, perhaps it would also be a manifestation
of their reduced sexual disgust or, or
not. Hypothetically speaking.
Yes.
Yes. Yes. Yes. Because yes, this is important question
because we didn't measure social disgust. And we me,
we measured risk taking behavior indirectly by the measure
of following or not the, the the guidelines of
staying at home. Yeah. But I was saying,
yeah, that's an important clarification. But it was, I
was just saying hypothetically. Sure.
Yes. Yes, I agree.
So let's get them into mating systems in humans.
Um Of course, I, I guess that uh I
don't know if you agree with me, but I
guess that from the discussions I had on the
show with evolutionary psychologists and anthropologists in general, there
are three main mating systems in human societies, monogamy,
polygyny, and polyandry. So, but uh how do you
approach mating systems from an evolutionary perspective?
OK. Um I think the mating systems uh we,
we have to, to understand that they represent uh
a pattern of sexual behavior that is found at
the species level or at the population level. We're
not talking about uh uh individuals like we have
been talking uh previously. Yeah. What, what, what do
we, what do we know about uh mating systems
is more related to the primate literature? And what,
what we can say about primates is that primates
usually have uh a primary mating system, but they
might have a secondary and, or a tertiary mating
system. Ok. So, in humans, when it comes to
humans, there is a debate if our primary mating
system is monogamy or polygyny, right? Uh In the
past, in the early two thousands, uh there was
more agreement that the majority of societies were more
uh polygynous societies. And, but nowadays, uh it seems
for me, I, I'm not following exactly uh the,
the, the literature on this topic. But II, I
tend to think that uh anthropologists have been uh
suggesting that there are more monogamous societies uh nowadays.
And the, the reason for that is because uh
of the cultural contact between different cultures, especially the
cultures in, in the West. Um But despite the
fact that uh 24 years ago, uh this study
showed that there was more polygamous societies uh in
the worlds, most of people were monogamous and, and
advised that because even if the society allows, allows
some men, uh we we, we actually found more
poly society than polyandry societies. And even if those
uh societies allows men to, to have more than
one than one wife, not all, all men in
those societies can afford to have larger families. So
even if they want to have larger families, they
cannot afford for this because of material resources. They
do not, uh they do not uh they do
not have. Um And, and the, the, the, the
point, the point that I understand about the mating
systems in humans is the specific benefits and tradeoffs
related to uh sorry, the benefits and costs uh
uh in, in which societies uh develop some kind
of uh uh mating systems from monogamy to poly
polyandry or monogamy. Uh It seems that the, the
social ecology plays a significant role in the adoption
of this mating systems in humans. Uh THE ability
of men to have more uh resources but also
which sex is responsible for the material resources in
the societies of, in, in the societies and many
others. Uh SOCIO ecological factors.
Mhm. But can we say if there's a predominant
mating system in human societies? Because uh as you
mentioned there and from the conversations I had with,
for example, anthropologists on the show, uh I guess
that uh you, you what you said there is
up to date that most traditional societies that we
studied until recently were uh predominantly polygynous. But now
in more recent times, they tend to be more
monogamous. I mean, most societies across the globe and
the, the bigger ones at least. So, uh I
mean, can we really say that we as humans
have one predominant or primary mating system or, I
mean, is that, is, is it that it just
depends on our socio ecology and that's all we
can say about it.
But that's a big question. I don't, I don't
know if I'm the best person to, to, to
tell you that. But uh my, my perspective on
this is that the mating systems in, in humans
or other primates are the results of the interactions
of the interaction of our evolved mechanisms and the
environment, right? Uh So I would say that if
most of societies adopt one mating system of the
oo other depends on their interaction of those factors.
Uh And of course, we have to take into
account the specific historical moment. We are considering maybe
uh 10, 10,000 years ago, we would have a
different uh a a AAA different predominant mating system
in humans. Uh But 24 years ago, anthropologists tend
to think that polygamy was the most predominant. And
now we say that is monogamy. And I think
that polygamy and monogamy may be um the the
most important ones uh in, in, in, in the
sense of, of how frequent they are. But that
depends of course, of the timescale we are considering,
right? Because uh evolutionary processes are also historical processes
and we have to take into account the, the
timescale when we make this uh this uh conclusions
or these assertions. Mhm
So, I, I mean, it's not really correct to
say that we are, for example, a monogamous species
or a polygynous species. I mean, that doesn't make
much sense.
No, no. Yes, I would say that doesn't make
sense. II, I would say actually that we have
many psychological adaptations that allowed us to develop uh
mating systems at the population level, regarded to monogamy
or poly or uh polygamous mating systems.
And then of course, there's also these are rarer
cases, but there's also cases of polyandrous societies. Like
for example, if I remember correctly, there are some
uh agricultural societies in the Himalayas in Nepal, for
example, where uh two brothers married the same woman
because I mean, the I guess that uh the
main rationale behind that is that since they are
an agricultural society, if the two brothers married different
women, then when they inherited the land, they would
have to divide it between the two of them.
And so they would get smaller portions and they
wouldn't really be able to get good enough yields
from those smaller portions of land. And so two
brothers married the same woman and uh the Children
are considered Children of the both of them. But
still, even though there's the uh issue of paternity,
uncertainty in that case, that sort of buffered by
the fact that since they are brothers, they share,
they share a big percentage of their DNA. And
so the conflict there is reduced between
reduced. Yes, indeed, that's one important uh aspect of
this. They, they, they tend to be brothers.
Yeah. So, I mean, I guess that we've already
touched on the question as to whether there are
differences between mating systems in ancient human societies compared
to more modern human society. So, uh let me
ask you another kind of question that this will
probably be the last question of our conversation today.
What do you think specifically about polyamory? Because there
are people that argue that polyamory is distinct from
uh any form of polygamy, like polygyny or polyandry.
Do, do you look at it as a distinct
mating system or not?
Uh To be honest, I haven't thinking uh I
haven't thought about this uh about polyamory, but uh
I would say that polyamory is not the same
as a mating system. Uh If, if you remember,
we, we, we remember the definition of mating system,
mating systems happens at the level of a population
or at the level of a species. Uh I
would say that polyamory is more related to the
individual level of analysis and maybe is related to
the benefits and costs that individuals uh uh find
in their, in their environment. Uh As, as as
I, as I mentioned it. Uh PREVIOUSLY, I believe
we have many psychological adaptations that allowed us to
uh to form uh different kinds of uh arrangements
of romantic arrangements that depends of what is available
to a specific individual uh in, in western societies
in industrialized societies, more and more people are thinking
about the, the costs of having a single part
for a long period of time because people are
able to develop interests, uh romantic or sexual interacts,
interest for other people. And they might compromise the
relationship if they, they have with a long term
partner. So there are people out uh discussing this
uh uh these challenges and they uh kind of
uh suggest that polyamory would be a solution. Uh
If it, because people would be, would would in
a consensual way uh from, from both, from both
uh parts uh maybe develop uh more uh the
one relation, longer term relationship at a time, right?
And one of 11 of it, it's, it's interesting
to analyze the trends because one of the, the
arguments that people say is that poly polyamory already
existed. Uh It, it, it was only not allowed
or men were allowed to, to, to develop more
than one romantic relationship at a time and women
were not. But the question, the question is, I
think answering your, your question is not, polyamory is
not a mating system because mating systems happens at
a different level. But we are perfectly able to,
to develop uh this because as we see in
societies that have polyandry or polygyny, uh it's perfectly
possible to have mo more than one partner uh
at the same time. So uh I believe that
we, we, we, we have this, this um uh
possibility. It, it was only the environment that did
not accept maybe the, our cultural, our cultural restrictions
to, to these that were more orientated to, uh,
a monogamy lifestyle.
Mhm. Yes. And in this particular case, I guess
that, uh, some of the reasons why people who
talk about polyamory, distinguish it from something like, uh,
polygyny or polyandry or some form of polygamy is
the fact that many times across human societies, uh
a poly polygamous relationship is based on uh marriage.
I mean, there's marriage associated with it, but in
polyamory, not necessarily. And also, I guess that in
polyamory we're not talking, we're not talking about uh
uh necessarily long term romantic relationships. But it can
be, for example, a romantic relationship with one partner
and then with the others just uh sexual relationships
or relationships that are simply sexual in their nature.
Right? Yeah. Yes. Yes, I agree. I agree.
Ok. Great. So, um Mauru just before we go,
uh would you like to tell people what are
the things you're working on at the moment or
we'll be working on in the near future if
people are interested?
Yes. Uh I'm working on uh individual differences in
social sexuality and uh the factors that affect uh
relationship satisfaction. And more recently, I, I became interested
in the study of emotions from uh an evolutionary
psychological perspective, like anger and uh and shame. II,
I, I'm at the beginning of, of this.
Mhm GREAT. And if people are interested, where can
they find you when you work on the internet?
Uh THEY can find me on research Gates. I
have a profile there and I have also the
Google citations uh uh profile. So it would be
easy to, to find me on those two platforms.
OK. I'm leaving links to that in the description
box of the interview. And thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you, Richard. It was my, my pleasure and
thank you for the invitation.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken H her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K. Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson Ya, Des Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi na Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, La Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Fists, Larry Dey junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey.
Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica, a week
in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis Valentine Steinman Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.